Assignment 2
Intelligent data analysis
DV1597
Shahrooz Abghari and Bruna Palm
Department of Computer Science
Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden
April 2026
1
Introduction
For this assignment, you are working in groups of two (2) students. The objec-
tive of this assignment is to perform explanatory data analysis on the provided
datasets.
More information about this data and what Python packages you
are allowed to use in this assignment is also listed below. The result from this
assignment should be an interactive Jupyter Notebook and a written report
(PDF format) that you submit via the course page on Canvas before the dead-
line (which is also stated on Canvas).
2
The assignment
This assignment involves importing a few datasets from an external file to a
suitable Python data structure. It may include handling various data cleaning
tasks and transformations, as well as aggregating the data in different ways. Fi-
nally, you are expected to perform data-driven analyses to answer the questions
described in Section 3 and, if necessary, create graphical graphs.
2.1
Datasets
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC)1 gathers the
datasets that you will use in this assignment. The data is publicly available
and contains information about the coronavirus pandemic, such as the number
of COVID-19 cases and deaths, hospitalization and Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
admission rates, and current occupancy, and vaccination across the EU/EEA.
More information on the data collection process can be found on the ECDC
website2.
There are three (3) datasets you need to work with, which can be found on
the course page in Canvas (it is important that you use exactly that file for this
exercise). The datasets are as follows:
1. COVID-19_daily_number_of_new_cases_and_deaths.csv
2. COVID-19_vaccination.csv
3. COVID-19_hospital_and_ICU_admission_rates.csv
1ECDC: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en
2ECDC Data Collection: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/data-collection
1


2.2
Allowed programming language, packages, and tools
This assignment should be solved using Python (version 3) and packages avail-
able in Pip3 that are possible to execute on Linux, macOS, and Win64. Note
that the resulting notebook you submit for the examination should be of the
type Jupyter Notebook.
2.3
Grades
This assignment is graded with the following grades: A, B, C, D, E, Fx, F.
3
Questions and examination
Your task is to (i) perform explanatory data analysis on the given datasets and
(ii) answer the provided questions in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. More specifically, you
should inspect the datasets and perform some initial visualizations to identify
the relationship between the variables. In addition, you may need to perform
statistical analysis. Apart from your written answers in the report, you also need
to include statistical tests, tables, and plots (or more advanced visualizations)
to ground your answers in the data. All the code for the statistical tests, plots,
etc., should be available in your notebook.
3.1
Mandatory questions
The mandatory questions are presented below. Note, it is important that you
motivate every step and the choice of methods, statistical tests, and visualization
techniques when addressing these questions.
1. Since 2020 till 2022, which of the top 10 countries reported the most num-
ber of cases of COVID-19 in quarters per year (Q1-Q4 in each year)? Do
you find these numbers relatively high compared to the country’s popu-
lation? Do you see any connection among these countries regarding their
geographical locations and the period in which most cases are observed?
Discuss your observations.
2. Visualize each country’s total number of cases and deaths on a map plot
using their geographical locations in 2020, 2021, and 2022. Discuss your
observations.
3. What are the top 3 popular vaccine brands that have been used across
the EU/EEA? Can you observe the same popularity at the country level?
Are there any exceptions?
4. Considering the previous question, which target groups mainly received
these vaccine brands in each country?
5. Which countries are the most skeptical towards the first dose of the COVID-
19 vaccine? Do you think this matter had any impact on the hospitaliza-
tion level?
6. Rank all EU/EEA countries, based on their vaccinated population under
age 18 for the first dose of the COVID-19 vaccine, which countries have
the most and least vaccinated people under age 18 in regard to their total
populations?
7. Which countries have the oldest vaccinated population for the second
dose of the COVID-19 vaccine in regard to their total population?
8. Which countries’ health care was most affected by the coronavirus pan-
demic in 2020, compared to others? How are these statistics in 2022?
2


3.2
Mandatory questions for grades A and B
If you aim for an A or B grade in the course, you must also answer three
additional questions. First, specify the three (3) most interesting questions you
think are worth investigating. One (1) of the questions must be based on the
combination of at least two of the provided datasets. Motivate why you think
those questions are worth exploring. Note that the chosen questions should not
be the same as the questions in Section 3.1. Furthermore, the questions need to
provide some valuable knowledge, e.g., for the public regarding COVID-19 and
its effects on EU/EEA countries.
Note it is important to motivate every step and the choice of methods, statis-
tical tests, and visualization techniques when addressing these questions.
4
Report and notebook to hand in
Your submitted report and notebook must be as self-explanatory as possible.
Ensure that the report has sections and subsections that follow a logical order.
You may consider providing an introduction to the problem you are investi-
gating. For the question sections (3.1 and 3.2), you may group the questions
based on their topics for each section while providing your answers, followed by
identified results in terms of plots, tables, etc., and your interpretations. You
may finalize your report with a discussion section and possible future directions
for expanding the report, e.g., questions you are interested in studying but do
not have enough time or relevant data to address.
If you prefer to write your report using a specific template, we suggest the
“Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science.” The template is available in
both LaTeX and Microsoft Word formats. The page limit for the report is 6 to
10 pages, using the suggested template.
Concerning the code, use markup cells in the notebook to create sufficient sec-
tions/subsection headings, as well as text descriptions before the cells containing
your Python code. Comment on your Python code extensively. Any output that
is presented by your Python code should be professionally formatted. This also
applies to any plot you create, which involves (i) giving them sufficient size to
make the shown data interpretable visually, (ii) a proper heading in the plot,
and (iii) not putting too many labels on either axis. Note that your submitted
notebook should be a Jupyter Notebook that includes Python 3 code.
5
Upon submission of your report and notebook
Before uploading your report, make sure that the following are met:
1. That you have included your names and email addresses in both the
report and notebook.
2. That you have answered all questions in section 3.1. If you aim for grade
A or B, then make sure to answer the questions in Section 3.2.
3. Both the report and notebook follow logically and a well-structured for-
mat with written explanations.
4. That you have carefully checked both the report and the notebook for
spelling and grammatical errors.
5. That your notebook is of type Jupyter Notebook.
6. That your report and notebook are written in English.
Failure to comply with any of the aspects above could result in a failing grade,
and you have to revise the report and submit it again at a later deadline.
Good luck!
3


